[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> "Thinking Allowed,"
conversations on the leading
edge of knowledge and discovery
with psychologist Jeffrey
Mishlove.
>> Hello and welcome.
I'm Jeffrey Mishlove.
Today, we will be
exploring once again
the enormous social
and personal changes
through which we are evolving.
My guest is Jean Houston,
author of numerous books,
including "A Passion for the
Possible," "The Passion of Isis
and Osiris," "The
Possible Human," "Search
for the Beloved," "The Hero and
the Goddess," and "Jump Time."
Jean is the director of the
Foundation for Mind Research.
And she is also a worldwide
educator and founder
of the Mystery School.
Welcome, jean.
>> Thank you, Jeff.
>> You know, in religious
traditions it's sometimes said
that there's a new age, an age
of Aquarius, or a new yuga.
One might even think,
and I tend to think,
that something is
happening now, perhaps
even comparable to the evolution
of the first single-celled
creature when you consider
what we're doing to the planet,
linking it together
electronically.
It's as if the planet is
becoming a global organism.
The changes through which
we are going are so vast,
it's hard to have
a handle on it.
You might compare it
to the Renaissance.
But I think it's much,
much, bigger than that.
>> Much larger.
We're being rescaled to
planetary proportions.
And there's been
prophetic things about it.
One thinks of the
movie "2001" when
you had that cosmic fetus know
wrapped in a luminous placenta
overlooking the Earth.
And that reminds me of the
time when we came back,
we came back as the
partners of the Earth.
>> After the first spaceflights.
So that's very different.
That whole sense of
new age, you know,
that's a term that has
been used many times.
You find in the Book of Daniel.
You can certainly find it in
Hegel, and Marx, and Lessing.
It's on the dollar bill, the
new order, novus ordo seclorum.
But I think this is truly it.
I mean other, times in
history thought they were it.
They were wrong.
This is it.
>> There's a sense, I think,
from the Mayan predictions,
that time will end.
>> That time will end or history
will come to an end as we have
known it.
Now, whether that's
true or not--
in a sense, it's true.
But it's not accurate.
As opposed to being
accurate but not true.
And I think that
what is going on
is that there are so many
radical things happening
that, as I said, today does
not look like tomorrow at all.
And the acceleration of time
and space, the acceleration
of things in our lives--
if I were to say to you,
compared to when you
and I first met 30 years ago--
and I remember you as
leaping from balconies
and swinging on beams.
You were a monkey man
in your early 20s.
Do you remember that?
And you still are.
You still are
swinging from beams.
But they're beams of
thought, aren't they?
They're beams of possibility.
But how would you--
we met probably somewhere
in the early '70s.
>> In the early '70s, yes.
>> How would you compare what
you see in your life now?
>> There were concepts
then that I was exploring.
At that time, I was very
interested, for example,
in UFOs.
But other people were not.
And it was hard to
discuss it with people.
Now, it's as if the whole
culture is preparing itself
for things that you
couldn't discuss back then.
>> As if we are in preparation.
We're in a giant womb, a kind
of gestation chamber for a world
that we used to just see as
a kind of myth or a science
fiction.
And we are beginning the first
bird-like, crack, crack, crack,
crack cracks to come
out of this place
that we've been in preparation.
And what it will be will
probably be way beyond anything
that we have even conceived of.
>> I mean, children
are different.
We talk about these children who
seem strangely prescient, seem
to be very knowing.
Elders are different.
Elders-- let me
tell you something
that I've never really
spoken about before.
Some years ago, as you
know, I had a terrible time.
I found myself on the front
page of every newspaper
in the world.
>> Yes, I remember that.
>> It was awful, for
something that never happened.
>> I know how wounded you felt.
>> Oh, it was awful.
Because I had just helped
Hillary Clinton write a book.
And they said that I'd been
doing seances in the White
House, which I had not.
I merely helped the
poor woman write a book.
>> And if you had
been doing seances,
it would have been OK by me.
>> It would have been OK by you.
But that's not what happened.
I've never even
been to a seance.
But anyway, I felt very wounded.
So I said, look, I'm wounded.
I'm vulnerable.
I'm available.
So I went out.
And I began to work
with AIDS babies,
healing, working with them.
And I began to work with
people with Alzheimer's.
My uncle was dying, in the
last stages of Alzheimer's.
So I was visiting him
in a nursing home.
And then I began to
see what I could do.
And I said, look, how could
I be with these people?
I know something
else is going on.
So I began to visit
nursing homes--
I still do-- and talk to
elderly people who had what was
described as Alzheimer's.
And I would take
them by the hands.
And say it was some fellow
who'd been born in 1908.
And I'd begin to
sing to them songs
that I thought they heard
as babies, (SINGING)
hushabye, don't you cry, go
to sleep you little baby.
(SPEAKING) Then I'd
go up to around 1911.
And it would be something
like, oh, you know,
(SINGING) London bridge is
falling down, falling down.
(SPEAKING) The 1912,
1913, a song from then,
(SINGING) every little movement
has a meaning all on its own.
(SPEAKING) 1917,
(SINGING) I wish I
could shimmy like
my sister Kate.
Nursing is my vocation.
France is my destination.
(SPEAKING) 1924, (SINGING)
Charleston, Charleston,
[HUMMING].. (SPEAKING) 1931,
(SPEAKING) you are
the promised princess.
And I would go on year by year.
Well, somewhere around
the 1940s, (SINGING)
I got my heart, I
love it, (SPEAKING)
they'd start to sing with me.
And then we'd be singing.
We'd be singing
through the '40s.
We'd sing through the
'50s, "Unchained Melody."
And then, at a certain
point, I realized
from a change in their eyes
that we could communicate.
Because we had communicated at
a different bandwidth, music.
And often, they would start to,
either a sing a song, or even
in words, tell me
about where they were.
And they would tell me
about adventures so strange,
and mythic landscapes
that they were visiting.
>> While they're
experiencing Alzheimer's?
>> Yes, as if there was another
world that they were very alive
and very feisty in.
And some of them could
even make a distinction
between the world here,
which had receded,
and the world there,
which had opened up.
And I knew, as Rumi had
said, the great Sufi poet,
that for every garden
we see without,
there are 70,000 gardens within.
And I've taught a lot of
nurses-- not too many doctors,
truth be told, but
a lot of nurses
how you know how to begin
by essentially changing
the valence, changing
the perspective to a very
different form of contact, and
also appreciating and honoring
that more was going on
there than pathology.
The pathology was the surface.
The mythic structures that
were going on were much better.
>> You have never seen a
wall that you didn't know
there's a window or
a door somewhere.
>> There's something.
Or you creep in underneath,
or down the chimney.
>> There's always a
way to get through.
>> So I found that the great
gift to me of being vulnerable,
that vulnerable
and that wounded,
because in our woundings are
openings to other places,
is that we become deeply
available to other people,
and then can call forth,
beyond their wounding,
the treasures that are there.
>> Well, our world
is a wounded world.
We're living in an era right
now where more species are
going extinct--
>> Every 25 minutes.
>> Since the age of the
dinosaur extinction,
we haven't seen this.
>> Yes, this huge cut back.
And yet, something
else is going on.
Maybe the cultures and
the psyche are blooming.
We talked in a
previous interview
which we had together
about how part of my work
has been to help
cultures deepen.
In the words of T.S.
Eliot, redeem the time,
redeem the unread vision
of the higher dream.
And I wonder that with a high
individuation, the reculturing
of cultures, and the
growth of new cultures
that's occurring,
whether the Earth
herself is redeeming
some of the species lost
through the birth of culture
and the redemption of culture.
But it is true that
in the next 20 years,
there are some
radical things we're
going to have to do
on the outward world
with parallels in
the inward world.
We're going to have
to use nanotechnology
to reconstitute our atmosphere.
We're going to have to go
into the archives of genotypes
and genetics and
bring back species.
But we have the
power to do that.
But we will not have
the power to do it
if we do not have another
consciousness that
will agree to it.
Because as Einstein said, the
consciousness that created
the problem cannot be the same
consciousness that solves that
problem.
>> And technology isn't what's
going to solve our problems.
It's wisdom.
>> It's wisdom, wisdom
brought to that,
wisdom that sees a very
different notion of the idea
of progress.
>> Einstein said that we must
learn to grow in wisdom as much
as we have grown in power.
>> Absolutely, no question.
>> And that is often your
role as a wisdom teacher.
>> Well, I don't know.
There's a lot of us out there.
>> Thankfully.
>> And, you know, the beauty
of your show is that you bring
them forward.
You bring them forward.
Whereas they wouldn't show up
necessarily on some of these--
>> Not on television, no.
>> --on the major media.
>> It's a privilege to do that.
>> Because the major media
is economically driven
for entertainment, for what
will give a tang excitement,
not for what will give a depth.
And that's where
programs like yours
bring the depth perspective.
And so a sufficiency
of people I know--
because I see people
everywhere around the world who
see your programs.
They say, I woke up because
of something that I saw Jeff
Mishlove's.
>> It's been important
for me to do that.
It's been a calling.
It came to me in dreams,
as a matter of fact.
>> Really?
I didn't know that.
>> Oh, well, we can
talk about that, Jean.
But we need to take our break.
>> OK, all right.
>> We'll be back in
just a little bit.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Welcome back to
"Thinking Allowed."
I'm your host, Jeffrey Mishlove.
We're talking about the enormous
changes that are taking place
now in our time.
And my guest is an
agent of change,
the wonderful psychologist and
mystery school teacher Jean
Houston, author of "Jump Time."
Welcome back.
>> Thank you.
You know, I was asking
you before the break
to tell us about the
dream that you had that
initiated this kind of program.
>> Well, it's very interesting.
In 1973, Jean, right about
the time I first met you--
in '73, actually-- I
was a graduate student
in criminology.
And I was studying every
form of social deviance,
all the negative
sides of human nature.
And I knew I had to change.
I wanted to study the
positive side of human nature.
But frankly, at the University
of California where I was,
you could study psychopathology
and crime, very many programs
to do that.
But if you wanted to study
creativity, intuition,
mysticism, psychic functioning,
there was no possibility.
And I agonized over this
for many, many months.
And one day, I woke up.
And I said to myself,
tonight, I will have a dream.
I knew all day long that a dream
was going to come that night.
And so I prepared for it.
I drank a big glass
of water before I
went to bed so I could wake
up and write the dream down.
And in the middle
of the night, I
dreamt that I was visiting
some friends in Berkeley.
I ran across town.
Well, I'm getting
ahead of myself.
I went to their apartment,
knocked on the door.
There was no answer.
And in the dream, I took
the key, let myself in.
And in the middle of
the living room floor
was a magazine
called "Eye," E-Y-E.
And I remember very distinctly
reading this magazine
in the dream.
And then I woke up.
And I felt like, oh, Eureka!
I've found it!
The answer is in the magazine!
But I didn't know
what the answer was.
So I actually, then, I got up.
I put on my tennis
shoes, ran across
town, first thing
in the morning.
Got to the apartment.
Knocked on the door.
Nobody was there,
as I had dreamt.
So I did know where
they kept their key.
I let myself in, walked
into the living room.
And sure enough, all by itself,
in the middle of the living
room floor was one magazine.
It was called "Focus."
And dream distortion, I guess,
it brought in focus to my life.
I began paging through it.
It was a magazine for
public television and radio
in the San Francisco Bay Area.
And as I paged through
it, I said to myself,
this is how I can pursue my
interest, by getting involved
in listener-sponsored media.
And it never occurred
to me before.
I didn't own a radio or
television at the time.
I didn't believe that electronic
media was an authentic form
of communication.
But I changed my mind.
And within three weeks, I was
working as a volunteer at KPFA
in Berkeley, where I
first interviewed you
shortly thereafter.
And I started as a receptionist,
just answering the phone.
But within a few weeks,
they gave me my own program.
And it changed my life.
>> It changed the life
of many other people.
>> I've been doing
this work ever since.
And I've always felt that there
was something from the dream
world bringing this out in me.
>> The dream time that according
to the Australian Aborigines,
transcends all time and space
and holds patterns and ideas.
In the altered state,
you were able to receive
part of your intelligence--
part of your destiny.
Have you had dreams recently?
>> All the time, yeah.
>> No, I know you do that.
But I'm saying that you
have leaking margins.
>> Those kinds of dreams, that
one has let was good for 30
years.
I don't have those
powerful dreams that often.
I have had dreams that called
me to study parapsychology.
>> Well, this is where
you gained access.
You had the access code
to your own possibility
that would help the
world's possibility.
One of the things I try
to encourage people to do
is to get together,
even in small groups,
and begin to dream together--
I call them the
Asclepeion dreams.
You've been in a few of these--
so that we can begin to
commune at a different level
of consciousness with what is
the larger journey, the larger
story, for each of
us and for the world.
It is there.
I'm convinced of it.
And so many people get so stuck
they cannot see the next stage.
They just feel trivialized
in their lives.
Because that's true.
They are trivialized
only on a certain level.
But at other levels, as in
the dream, as in meditation,
as in creative states,
as in loving states,
as in community, they're
not trivialized anymore.
They open up the spectrum.
And in that spectrum is the
story of what they can do next
and what they can
do to be co creators
in this extraordinary world of
change that we call jump time.
>> Well, this is why,
to be honest, Jean,
you have been an important
person to me for 30 years.
Because when I had
these experiences that
meant everything to me, and
I went to other teachers
and psychologists and asked
for a context, an explanation,
a wisdom about it, they
couldn't say anything.
That's why I became
a parapsychologist.
I figured I had to
become my own expert.
But you have always
been able to articulate
a sense of what's
going on at that level,
at the archetypal level.
>> Well, see, I think we contain
within us at least these three
levels, our local life
that I call this-is-me,
who I am in time, and space,
profession, and gender,
marriage, those details.
And beneath that
and larger than that
is the archetypal
level, where I become
part of the collective
unconscious of the human race.
I become part of the
great mind field,
the trillion-gigabyte
disk of creation,
the symbols, the
myths, the gods,
the great symbolic
figures, the larger,
stories the larger juice.
And of course, beyond
that, it is the I-am.
It is being itself, the
God stuff that sustains it
all, the source levels.
That we human beings do
have access to these things,
but we live out of such a
little tiny framework of that.
You know, Madeleine L'Engle
wrote a wonderful book
called "The Irrational Season."
And in it, she has an image.
She said, suppose
you were suddenly
placed in the midst of
the most beautiful planet
in the universe.
But you had one sense upward,
and that's all, sense of smell.
That's all.
You go around [SNIFFING],,
awfully interesting.
You know, that's all you knew.
And then, suddenly, all
your senses, plus much,
much more opened up.
What would it be like?
It would be paradise, you see.
And I'm saying that
this is where we are.
We operate as if we are in one
sense, of one limited modality.
But beyond us, beneath
us, within us, around us,
is this incredible sensory
orchestral splendor.
But it means becoming
present to it, being aware.
Stop, if you will,
100 times a day.
Stop, go off of robot.
Go into presence.
This, of course,
what the Buddhists
refer to as mindfulness.
And gradually,
the inner presence
opens up as the
outer presence does.
It feeds each other.
And suddenly, you're no longer
living a posthumous existence,
as Keith said.
Or you go off of
lackluster passivity
into this dynamic,
rich, engaging,
world that is the world in which
those three worlds, this-is-me,
the archetypal world,
the God world open up.
Meister Eckhart said,
speaking as God,
he said, I became man for
you, if you do not become
God for me, you do me wrong.
>> Well, you have a great gift
of articulating these things
with the full authority of
world culture behind you.
And that's what's needed
so much in our time, where
the priests of our
society sometimes
come from either
a narrow religious
or a narrow scientific place.
We need new priests,
new spokespeople who
can blend these two visions.
And you do that beautifully.
>> Well, I think it's--
I don't know if it's
priestcraft as it is midwifery.
It's evoking the-- and it's
also being a generalist.
I'm a generalist as I have
to study constantly and try
to bring in hitherto divided
and distinguished worlds.
>> But in the era of
information explosion,
generalists are
especially what we need.
>> Well, then we should have
more generalists, shouldn't we?
Should we go out
and promote that?
But people who are generalists,
both in the vertical dimension,
as well as in the
horizontal dimension, who
can help people gain access
to the depths of riches
within themselves and within
the great psychic continuum,
as well as in information about
how the muchness of this world.
>> You point out that the
depths are rising up now.
>> I believe that.
They may have always been there.
But the point is that
our access to them
is feistier and richer because
our need is so great I think
that's one of the
reasons that you
have so many people
searching as never
before in other
spiritual traditions
to find the bread of
life, the water of spirit.
You know, Rumi says, you
know, a basket full of bread
sits on your head.
And you go begging crusts from
door to door, up to your knees
and living water.
And you're dying of thirst.
Oh, stupid person.
Look at it, you have
sold yourself cheaply.
And my great sense is to
say, let's just stop it.
Let's stop and look at the
muchness of what you are,
and to give people concrete
examples of how they can think
in different ways, how they
can work with the depths of who
they are and with who others
are, how they can begin
to problem solve,
and to leave them
with ongoing
teaching-learning communities.
No guru, no guru.
Guru, to me is, spelled
gee, you are you.
You know?
No money involved,
wherever possible.
And of course, all my books
are written for people
to find these.
And in my new book, "Jump
Time," which is just out--
at least as of our talk here--
I try to provide ways
and means of doing this,
and to understand the immense
change of which we are a part.
>> Well, Jean Houston, you're
speaking to me as the authentic
spokesperson of the
real mystery tradition,
the awakening of humanity that
has been hidden in our culture
for thousands of years,
and is coming forth now.
>> Thank you.
>> It's been a great pleasure,
a joy, to be with you.
I feel so touched.
>> Well, it's lovely
being with you, Jeffrey.
Because you are one
of those people who
holds the breath and the
depth of human possibility.
>> Well, I feel privileged
to be in that position, Jean.
And let me say this for all
of my viewers, if I may.
People ask me many, many
times, who is the best
person you've ever interviewed?
And I've interviewed hundreds
and hundreds of people.
And I've always
said, beyond a doubt,
there's one person who stands
head and shoulders above all
of the others.
And it's you.
And I want to honor you and
acknowledge you for that.
>> Thank you.
>> Thanks so much,
Jean, for being with me.
>> Thank you, Jeffrey.
Thank you for having me.
>> And thank you
for being with us.
And if you haven't seen part
one of this two-part program,
check with Wisdom Network,
check your listings
to see that you find it.
[MUSIC PLAYING]